docs/heating-and-cooling/readme.md, before:


# NEED TO BE REVISED!!!

# Heating and Cooling -  Setup and Configuration

This documentation is about how to control a heating like a heat pump which is able to heat up in winter and to cool down in summer.

<img src="./HAClimatePanel.png" alt="Home Assistant Climate Panel" height="250"/>

In the following scenario we have an actuator (like FAE14, FHK14, F4HK14, F2L14, FHK61, FME14) controlling the heating valve dependent on the configured target and current temperature. The target temperature is sent frequently by a room temperature sensor and the target temperature can be set via control panel (e.g. Eltako FTAF55ED) or Home Assistant [Climate Panel](https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/core/entity/climate).

Both control panels are updated via a frequently sent telegram from the actuator based on EEP A5-10-06. For setting the target temperature the same EEP A5-10-06 is used.

Heating and cooling is supported, however it cannot be change via Climate Panel. It will be set via central rocker switch which defines the state for the whole heating. All actuators need to react on it.

<img src="./heating-and-cooling-setup2.png" alt="Heating and cooling setup" height=600 />

| Number      | Component   | Description |
| :---        | :---        | :---        |
| 1           | Heating and Cooling Actuator | e.g. Eltako FHK14, FAE14SSR ... . This actuator is controlling the heating valve (number 6)|
| 2           | Climate Panel | Virtual temperature controller in Home Assistant. <br/>It requires an own address which needs to be entered in the function group 3 of the actuator e.g. via PCT14 programming software. <br/>It's EEP is "A5-10-06". |
| 3           | Cooling Mode | Physical switch which is connected to FTS14EM and sends frequently (15min) a signal to stay in cooling mode or is off for heating. <br/>Supported EEPs: F6-02-01, F6-02-02, F6-10-00, D5-00-01, A5-08-01, M5-38-08 (FTS14EM contact signals and rocker switches are supported) <br/>In case of a rocker switch the button needs to be defined. 0x70 = top right, x50 = bottom right, 0x30 = top left, 0x10 = bottom left |
| 4           | Room Temperature Sensor | Sensor sending periodically (every 50 seconds) the current temperature of the room. |
| 5           | Temperature Controller | Physical wall-mounted temperature sensor and controller in one box. |
| 6           | Actuator | Bringing the valve into the right position. |

## Actuator Configuration in Device via PCT14

* **Heating is enabled** as default.
* **Operating state** instead of switching state is enabled.
* In **function group 1 a temperature sensor and controller** is entered which sends frequently the current room temperature.
* **Optionally**: In **function group 2** a hygrostat/humidity sensor is entered.
* In **function group 3** address for **Home Assistant Climate Panel** is entered.
* **Optionally**: In **function group 4** a rocker switch is entered for changing the **heating modes** (Normal, Off, Night reduction (-4°K), reduction (-2°K) - Predefined by Eltako). Not optional for FUTH. (See below)
* **Optionally**: In **function group 4** a rocker switch is entered for changing from heating into **cooling mode**. Preferred solution is to use a physical switch connected to FTS14EM. 

## Configuration of temperature controller e.g. FUTH
You can configure target temperature for rooms in the physical control panel e.g. FUTH.

**IMPORTANT**: You need to send a teach-in telegram to the physical control panel so that it won't override the settings from climate controller in Home Assistant. (See description below in section for FUTH)

## Home Assistant Configuration

You can find the meaning of the numbers in the table above.

### Example with physical switch connected via FTS14EM (RECOMMENDED)
```
eltako:
  gateway:
    device: fam-usb
    base_id: FF-80-80-00
  ...

  binary_sensor:
  - id: FF-AA-10-08               # Wired via FTS14EM
    eep: D5-00-01
    name: "cooling switch"
  ...

  climate:
    - id: FF-AA-00-09             # Address of actuator (1)
      eep: A5-10-06               # Telegram type of the actuator (1)

      temperature_unit: "°C"      # Displayed temperature unit in Climate Panel (2)
      min_target_temperature: 17  # Optional field, default value 17 (2)
      max_target_temperature: 25  # Optional field, default value 25 (2)

      sender:                     # Virtual temperature controller (2)
        id: FF-AA-00-09           # Sender address (2) needs to be entered .
        eep: A5-10-06             # 2: Sender EEP

      cooling_mode:               # Optional part - cooling mode
        sensor:                   # Rocker switch (3) must be specified in binary_sensor
          id: 00-00-10-08         # Address of switch (3)
```



### Example with rocker switch as cooling switch which must be triggered frequently (each 15min)
```
eltako:
  
  gateway:
    device: fam-usb
    base_id: FF-80-80-00

  ...
  binary_sensor:
  - id: FF-DD-0A-1B
    eep: "F6-02-01"
    name: "cooling switch"
  ...

  climate:
    - id: FF-AA-00-09             # Address of actuator (1)
      eep: A5-10-06               # Telegram type of the actuator (1)

      temperature_unit: "°C"      # Displayed temperature unit in Climate Panel (2)
      min_target_temperature: 17  # Optional field, default value 17 (2)
      max_target_temperature: 25  # Optional field, default value 25 (2)

      sender:                     # Virtual temperature controller (2)
        id: FF-80-80-09           # Sender address (2) needs to be entered .
        eep: A5-10-06             # 2: Sender EEP
      
      thermostat:                 # Optional section - physical thermostat for sync.
        id: FF-EE-55-81           # Sender address of thermostat
        eep: A5-10-06             # 5: EEP of thermostat

      cooling_mode:               # Optional part - cooling mode
        sensor:                   # Rocker switch (3) must be specified in binary_sensor
          id: FF-DD-0A-1B         # Address of switch (3)
          switch-button: 0x50     # In case of switch button needs to be specified.
                                  # for rocker switches only
```

## Information about Eltako FLGTF

<img src="./FLGTF55-wg.jpg" height="150">

* EEP A5-04-02 for temperature and humidity.
* EEP A5-09-05 for air quality. (Not yet supported)
* EEP A5-09-0C for air quality. (Not yet supported)

### Configuration in Home Assistant

```
eltako:
  ...

  sensor:
  - id: ff-ee-dd-81
    eep: A5-04-02
    name: "Temp. and Humidity Sensor - FLGTF"
 ...
```

<img src="./Temp. Sensor - FLGTF.png" height="135">

## Information about Eltako FUTH (Temperature Controller)

<img src="./FUTH55ED.jpg" height="150">

### Recommendations
* Purchase the 12-24UC version instead of 230V version because FUTH55ED/230V is squeaking.

### Configuration of FHK/FAE via PCT14

| Function Group |  Function | Description | 
| ---: | ---: | --- |
| 1 | 64 | Target and Current Temperature (EEP **A5-10-06**) <br/>Room address must be selected. (See below, default = 0x01 offset) | 
| 3 | 65 | Home Automation SW (Temp Controller SW EEP **A5-10-06**) |
| 4 | 30 | 4x push button <br/>Mandatory value. Offset 0x11 |

### Configuration in Home Assistant

Actually the temperature controller (Climate Entity) in Home Assistant gets its messages from FHK/FAE/... actuator instead of the controller itself. However you can reuse the built-in hygrostat sensor (temp. + humidity with EEP A5-10-12) and the temperature controller with current temperature (EEP A5-04-02) as separate sensor.

Example Hygrostat Sensor and single Temperature Sensor:
```
eltako:
  ...

  sensor:
  - id: FF-EE-55-92
    eep: A5-10-12
    name: "Temp. and Humidity Sensor - FUTH"
  - id: FF-EE-55-81
    eep: A5-04-02
    name: "Temp. Sensor - Room 1 FUTH"
 ...
```

<img src="./Temp. and Humidity Sensor - FUTH.png" height="135">
<img src="./Temp. Sensor - Room 1 FUTH.png" height="100">

## Teach-in FUTH
You need to teach-in telegram to FUTH so that it takes over the target temperature set in Home Assistant, otherwise FUTH will overwrite its target temperature every 55 seconds. If you have successfully teached-in FUTH, it will receive the target temperature from Home Assistant and apply it. Now both device will sync their target temperatures.

In Home Assistant you will find in the climate controller device for a button entity to send teach-in telegram to FUTH. Before doing it go into the menu of FUTH `learn -> heating -> controller -> wait for telegram` so it is waiting for the teach-in telegram and then send it.

**Hint**: Teach-in button only works when connected with USB transceiver. FAM14 and FGW14-USB do not send tech-in telegrams into the wireless network to FUTH.

<img src="./climate-tech-in-button2.png" height="350">

### Telegrams

| Signal type |	Telegram Org | Address/ID-Offset | EEP | Function in PCT14 |
| ---- | --- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| Room 1 / FKS | (ORG=0x7) |	0x00 | A5-20-01, A5-20-04 | function group: 1, function: 64 |
| Room 1 / FHK | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x01 | A5-10-06 | |
| Room 2 / FKS | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x02 | A5-20-01, A5-20-04 | function group: 1, function: 64 |
| Room 2 / FHK | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x03 | A5-10-06 | |
| Room 3 / FKS | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x04 | A5-20-01, A5-20-04 | function group: 1, function: 64 |
| Room 3 / FHK | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x05 | A5-10-06 | |
| Room 4 / FKS | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x06 | A5-20-01, A5-20-04 | function group: 1, function: 64 |
| Room 4 / FHK | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x07 | A5-10-06 | |
| Room 5 / FKS | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x08 | A5-20-01, A5-20-04 | function group: 1, function: 64 |
| Room 5 / FHK | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x09 | A5-10-06 | |
| Room 6 / FKS | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x0A | A5-20-01, A5-20-04 | function group: 1, function: 64 |
| Room 6 / FHK | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x0B | A5-10-06 | |
| Room 7 / FKS | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x0C | A5-20-01, A5-20-04 | function group: 1, function: 64 |
| Room 7 / FHK | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x0D | A5-10-06 | |
| Room 8 / FKS | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x0E | A5-20-01, A5-20-04 | function group: 1, function: 64 |
| Room 8 / FHK | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x0F | A5-10-06 | |
| Pump | (ORG=0x5/0x7)	| 0x10 | F6-02-01 (0x70 = on, 0x50 = off) <br/>A5-38-08 | ? |
| 4x Push Button |  (ORG=0x5/0x7)| 0x11 | F6-02-01 (0x70 = normal, 0x50 = night reduction (-4°K), 0x30 = reduction (-2°K), 0x10 = off) | function group: 4: function: 30 |
| Hygrostat/ Sensor | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x12 | EP A5-10-12 | function group: 2: function: 149 |
| FKS-MD10 | (ORG7)	| 0x13 | A5-20-01/A5-20-04 ? | - |
| Two point controller FUTH Room1 | (ORG5/7)	| 0x14 | ? | ? |

### Links
* [FUTH55ED Manual](https://www.eltako.com/fileadmin/downloads/en/_bedienung/FUTH55ED_230V_30055805-3_gb.pdf)
* [FHEM Forum: Controlling FUTH65D + Address ranges of FUTH****](https://forum.fhem.de/index.php?topic=82303.0)

Commit message:

eventing prepared for multiple gateways

docs/heating-and-cooling/readme.md, after:


# NEED TO BE REVISED!!!

# Heating and Cooling -  Setup and Configuration

This documentation is about how to control a heating like a heat pump which is able to heat up in winter and to cool down in summer.

<img src="./HAClimatePanel.png" alt="Home Assistant Climate Panel" height="250"/>

In the following scenario we have an actuator (like FAE14, FHK14, F4HK14, F2L14, FHK61, FME14) controlling the heating valve dependent on the configured target and current temperature. The target temperature is sent frequently by a room thermostat and the target temperature can be set via control panel (e.g. Eltako FTAF55ED) or Home Assistant [Climate Panel](https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/core/entity/climate).

Both control panels can synchronize themself. If both are use together climate panel in HA sends a telegram to the heater actuator and the thermostat will adapt the taget temperature when it changes. This communication is based on EEP A5-10-06.

Switching between heating and cooling is supported, however it cannot be changed via Climate panel in Home Assistant. You can configure a switch connected via FTS14EM to change between heating and cooling mode and the Climate panel in Home Assistant will the react on it and show the selected mode.

In the following picture you can see many possibility how you can combine all the sensors and actors with Home Assistant.

**Hint**: If you want to use and fully integrate thermostats like FUTH in combination with Home Assistant. Then two gateways are required. You can also simplify the setup by having static configurations.

<img src="./heating-and-cooling-setup3.png" alt="Heating and cooling setup" height=600 />

| Number      | Component   | Description |
| :---        | :---        | :---        |
| 1           | Heating and Cooling Actuator | e.g. Eltako FHK14, FAE14SSR ... . This actuator is controlling the heating valve (number 6)|
| 2           | Climate Panel | Virtual temperature controller in Home Assistant. <br/>It requires an own address which needs to be entered in the function group 3 of the actuator e.g. via PCT14 programming software. <br/>It's EEP is "A5-10-06". |
| 3           | Cooling Mode | Physical switch which is connected to FTS14EM and sends frequently (15min) a signal to stay in cooling mode or is off for heating. <br/>Supported EEPs: F6-02-01, F6-02-02, F6-10-00, D5-00-01, A5-08-01, M5-38-08 (FTS14EM contact signals and rocker switches are supported) <br/>In case of a rocker switch the button needs to be defined. 0x70 = top right, x50 = bottom right, 0x30 = top left, 0x10 = bottom left |
| 4           | Room Temperature Sensor | Sensor sending periodically (every 50 seconds) the current temperature of the room. |
| 5           | Thermostat | Physical wall-mounted temperature sensor and controller in one device. |
| 6           | Valve | Valve letting the water flow! |
| 7           | EnOcean Transceiver  |  Receives and sends telegrams in wireless network. (In contrast to FAM14 is can send commands into wireless network and synchronized the target temperature of Home Assistant Cliemate Panel and Thermostat e.g. FUTH.) |
| 8           | Heatpump | Heatpump which delivers warm or cold water to the valve. In the overview picture the switch for changing from warm to cold can be used for both automation and heating. |

## Actuator Configuration in Device via PCT14

* **Heating is enabled** as default.
* **Operating state** instead of switching state is enabled.
* In **function group 1 a temperature sensor and controller** is entered which sends frequently the current room temperature.
* **Optionally**: In **function group 2** a hygrostat/humidity sensor is entered.
* In **function group 3** address for **Home Assistant Climate Panel** is entered.
* **Optionally**: In **function group 4** a rocker switch is entered for changing the **heating modes** (Normal, Off, Night reduction (-4°K), reduction (-2°K) - Predefined by Eltako). Not optional for FUTH. (See below)
* **Optionally**: In **function group 4** a rocker switch is entered for changing from heating into **cooling mode**. Preferred solution is to use a physical switch connected to FTS14EM. 

## Configuration of temperature controller e.g. FUTH
You can configure target temperature for rooms in the physical control panel e.g. FUTH.

**IMPORTANT**: You need to send a teach-in telegram to the physical control panel so that it won't override the settings from climate controller in Home Assistant. (See description below in section for FUTH)

## Home Assistant Configuration

You can find the meaning of the numbers in the table above.

### Example with physical switch connected via FTS14EM (RECOMMENDED)
```
eltako:
  gateway:
    device: fam-usb
    base_id: FF-80-80-00
  ...

  binary_sensor:
  - id: FF-AA-10-08               # Wired via FTS14EM
    eep: D5-00-01
    name: "cooling switch"
  ...

  climate:
    - id: FF-AA-00-09             # Address of actuator (1)
      eep: A5-10-06               # Telegram type of the actuator (1)

      temperature_unit: "°C"      # Displayed temperature unit in Climate Panel (2)
      min_target_temperature: 17  # Optional field, default value 17 (2)
      max_target_temperature: 25  # Optional field, default value 25 (2)

      sender:                     # Virtual temperature controller (2)
        id: FF-AA-00-09           # Sender address (2) needs to be entered .
        eep: A5-10-06             # 2: Sender EEP

      cooling_mode:               # Optional part - cooling mode
        sensor:                   # Rocker switch (3) must be specified in binary_sensor
          id: 00-00-10-08         # Address of switch (3)
```



### Example with rocker switch as cooling switch which must be triggered frequently (each 15min)
```
eltako:
  
  gateway:
    device: fam-usb
    base_id: FF-80-80-00

  ...
  binary_sensor:
  - id: FF-DD-0A-1B
    eep: "F6-02-01"
    name: "cooling switch"
  ...

  climate:
    - id: FF-AA-00-09             # Address of actuator (1)
      eep: A5-10-06               # Telegram type of the actuator (1)

      temperature_unit: "°C"      # Displayed temperature unit in Climate Panel (2)
      min_target_temperature: 17  # Optional field, default value 17 (2)
      max_target_temperature: 25  # Optional field, default value 25 (2)

      sender:                     # Virtual temperature controller (2)
        id: FF-80-80-09           # Sender address (2) needs to be entered .
        eep: A5-10-06             # 2: Sender EEP
      
      thermostat:                 # Optional section - physical thermostat for sync.
        id: FF-EE-55-81           # Sender address of thermostat
        eep: A5-10-06             # 5: EEP of thermostat

      cooling_mode:               # Optional part - cooling mode
        sensor:                   # Rocker switch (3) must be specified in binary_sensor
          id: FF-DD-0A-1B         # Address of switch (3)
          switch-button: 0x50     # In case of switch button needs to be specified.
                                  # for rocker switches only
```

## Information about Eltako FLGTF

<img src="./FLGTF55-wg.jpg" height="150">

* EEP A5-04-02 for temperature and humidity.
* EEP A5-09-05 for air quality. (Not yet supported)
* EEP A5-09-0C for air quality. (Not yet supported)

### Configuration in Home Assistant

```
eltako:
  ...

  sensor:
  - id: ff-ee-dd-81
    eep: A5-04-02
    name: "Temp. and Humidity Sensor - FLGTF"
 ...
```

<img src="./Temp. Sensor - FLGTF.png" height="135">

## Information about Eltako FUTH (Temperature Controller)

<img src="./FUTH55ED.jpg" height="150">

### Recommendations
* Purchase the 12-24UC version instead of 230V version because FUTH55ED/230V is squeaking.

### Configuration of FHK/FAE via PCT14

| Function Group |  Function | Description | 
| ---: | ---: | --- |
| 1 | 64 | Target and Current Temperature (EEP **A5-10-06**) <br/>Room address must be selected. (See below, default = 0x01 offset) | 
| 3 | 65 | Home Automation SW (Temp Controller SW EEP **A5-10-06**) |
| 4 | 30 | 4x push button <br/>Mandatory value. Offset 0x11 |

### Configuration in Home Assistant

Actually the temperature controller (Climate Entity) in Home Assistant gets its messages from FHK/FAE/... actuator instead of the controller itself. However you can reuse the built-in hygrostat sensor (temp. + humidity with EEP A5-10-12) and the temperature controller with current temperature (EEP A5-04-02) as separate sensor.

Example Hygrostat Sensor and single Temperature Sensor:
```
eltako:
  ...

  sensor:
  - id: FF-EE-55-92
    eep: A5-10-12
    name: "Temp. and Humidity Sensor - FUTH"
  - id: FF-EE-55-81
    eep: A5-04-02
    name: "Temp. Sensor - Room 1 FUTH"
 ...
```

<img src="./Temp. and Humidity Sensor - FUTH.png" height="135">
<img src="./Temp. Sensor - Room 1 FUTH.png" height="100">

## Teach-in FUTH
You need to teach-in telegram to FUTH so that it takes over the target temperature set in Home Assistant, otherwise FUTH will overwrite its target temperature every 55 seconds. If you have successfully teached-in FUTH, it will receive the target temperature from Home Assistant and apply it. Now both device will sync their target temperatures.

In Home Assistant you will find in the climate controller device for a button entity to send teach-in telegram to FUTH. Before doing it go into the menu of FUTH `learn -> heating -> controller -> wait for telegram` so it is waiting for the teach-in telegram and then send it.

**Hint**: Teach-in button only works when connected with USB transceiver. FAM14 and FGW14-USB do not send tech-in telegrams into the wireless network to FUTH.

<img src="./climate-tech-in-button2.png" height="350">

### Telegrams

| Signal type |	Telegram Org | Address/ID-Offset | EEP | Function in PCT14 |
| ---- | --- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| Room 1 / FKS | (ORG=0x7) |	0x00 | A5-20-01, A5-20-04 | function group: 1, function: 64 |
| Room 1 / FHK | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x01 | A5-10-06 | |
| Room 2 / FKS | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x02 | A5-20-01, A5-20-04 | function group: 1, function: 64 |
| Room 2 / FHK | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x03 | A5-10-06 | |
| Room 3 / FKS | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x04 | A5-20-01, A5-20-04 | function group: 1, function: 64 |
| Room 3 / FHK | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x05 | A5-10-06 | |
| Room 4 / FKS | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x06 | A5-20-01, A5-20-04 | function group: 1, function: 64 |
| Room 4 / FHK | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x07 | A5-10-06 | |
| Room 5 / FKS | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x08 | A5-20-01, A5-20-04 | function group: 1, function: 64 |
| Room 5 / FHK | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x09 | A5-10-06 | |
| Room 6 / FKS | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x0A | A5-20-01, A5-20-04 | function group: 1, function: 64 |
| Room 6 / FHK | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x0B | A5-10-06 | |
| Room 7 / FKS | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x0C | A5-20-01, A5-20-04 | function group: 1, function: 64 |
| Room 7 / FHK | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x0D | A5-10-06 | |
| Room 8 / FKS | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x0E | A5-20-01, A5-20-04 | function group: 1, function: 64 |
| Room 8 / FHK | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x0F | A5-10-06 | |
| Pump | (ORG=0x5/0x7)	| 0x10 | F6-02-01 (0x70 = on, 0x50 = off) <br/>A5-38-08 | ? |
| 4x Push Button |  (ORG=0x5/0x7)| 0x11 | F6-02-01 (0x70 = normal, 0x50 = night reduction (-4°K), 0x30 = reduction (-2°K), 0x10 = off) | function group: 4: function: 30 |
| Hygrostat/ Sensor | (ORG=0x7)	| 0x12 | EP A5-10-12 | function group: 2: function: 149 |
| FKS-MD10 | (ORG7)	| 0x13 | A5-20-01/A5-20-04 ? | - |
| Two point controller FUTH Room1 | (ORG5/7)	| 0x14 | ? | ? |

### Links
* [FUTH55ED Manual](https://www.eltako.com/fileadmin/downloads/en/_bedienung/FUTH55ED_230V_30055805-3_gb.pdf)
* [FHEM Forum: Controlling FUTH65D + Address ranges of FUTH****](https://forum.fhem.de/index.php?topic=82303.0)
